KEP-4355: Coordinated Leader Election (#4356)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/4355-coordinated-leader-election/README.md

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This proposes a component leader election mechanism that is safer for upgrades
and rollbacks.

This leader election approach continues to use leases, but with two
key modifications:

- Instead of a race by component instances to claim the lease, component instances
  declare candidacy for a lease and a election coordinator claims the lease for the
  best available candidate. This allows the election coordinator to pick a

>   candidate with the lowest version to ensure that skew rules are not violated.

Reviewer: how can we determine component versions today without looking at `ps` or configuration files?
for example, KCM and kube-scheduler.

Reviewer 2: it looks like candidates have to be more aware of themselves. I think the election coordination requires a separate object type that is flexible enough to add more rules, evaluated based on the information sent from candidates.

Author: > how can we determine component versions today without looking at ps or configuration files?

For version awareness of the KCM and kube-scheduler we can leverage https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/component-base/version/version.go

Author: > I think the election coordination requires a separate object type that is flexible enough to add more rules, evaluated based on the information sent from candidates.

There a trade off here.  If we continue to use Lease, we have to put any additional information we need into metadata.annotations.  Leases already do quite a bit of this.  API server identity is a good example of where we've gone this route.   If we introduce a new object type, we could define the exact fields we need, but we'd diverge from how other parts of the system use leases, and we'd have a more complex migration path... the migration path if we continue to use the same leases is relatively trivial.

Reviewer: > For version awareness of the KCM and kube-scheduler we can leverage https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/component-base/version/version.go

as in, calling `component-name --version` on the host, to determine the version is running there?

Author: > as in, calling component-name --version on the host, to determine the version that is running there?

Components publish version information into [identity leases](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/529c9d675c5e2214a9320f80a1dbbdcb77f1a288/keps/sig-api-machinery/4355-coordinated-leader-election/README.md#component-identity-leases), the election controller observes the identity leases when managing the leader lease.

Reviewer 2: Do we have to restrict the coordinated leader election mechanism to only understand version as the only criteria to decide leader? Would it be beneficial to add a rule structure so that cluster operators can extend the rules beyond version ?

Author: > Would it be beneficial to add a rule structure so that cluster operators can extend the rules beyond version ?

Maybe?  What sort of use cases do you have in mind?

- The election coordinator can mark a lease as "end of term" to signal to the
  current leader to stop renewing the lease. This allows the election
  coordinator to preempt the current leader and replace it with a better one.

## Motivation

The most common upgrade approach used for Kubernetes control plane components is
a node-by-node approach where all the component of a control plane node are
terminated together and then restarted at the new version. This process is
performed node-by-node across a high availability configuration. 

Systems using node-by-node upgrades:

- Cluster API
- kubeadm
- KIND

To respect the [Kubernetes skew policy](https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/):

- Upgrades should keep controller managers and schedulers at the *old* version until all apiservers
  are upgraded.
- Rollbacks should rollback controller managers and schedulers at the *old* version before any
  apiservers are rolledback.

> But a node-by-node upgrade or rollback does not achieve this today.

Reviewer 3: This summary omits an important condition. The policy states that any apiservers that new controller managers and schedulers _communicate with_ are upgraded first.

> #### kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler, and cloud-controller-manager
> The kube-apiserver instances these components communicate with are at 1.29 (in HA clusters **in which these control plane components can communicate with any kube-apiserver instance** in the cluster, all kube-apiserver instances must be upgraded before upgrading these components)

(emphasis mine)

As an example, kOps performs node-by-node upgrades and does not violate the skew policy:

Controller managers and schedulers run on the same nodes as apiservers and are configured to only communicate with their localhost apiserver. When kOps replaces a control plane node, all components on the new node are of the new version and the new controller manager and scheduler processes only communicate with the new (local) apiserver.

Reviewer: > Controller managers and schedulers run on the same nodes as apiservers and are configured to only communicate with their localhost apiserver. When kOps replaces a control plane node, all components on the new node are of the new version and the new controller manager and scheduler processes only communicate with the new (local) apiserver.

same for kubeadm.

but as i mentioned above kubeadm just updates all CP components at once, randomly , which does not follow the upgrade recommendations, even if it might be fine given the localhost binding.

> - For upgrade, there is about a 25% chance of a new version of the controller

Reviewer 2: Although the emphasis in the details is on control plane components like KCM/scheduler, it may help if that is abstracted to any leaderelected controller.

> - For upgrade, there is about a 25% chance of a new version of the controller

Author: > i assume 25% is estimated for a particular control plane topology?

Sorry, yes. It assumes a 3 control plane node cluster.  When the 1st CM is upgraded, one of the other CMs typically claims the lease. When the second CM is upgraded, there is a 50% chance it will be the one with the lease, and if it is, there is a 50% chance that  when it is upgraded, that the already upgraded CM will claim the lease.

    coordination.k8s.io/can-lead-leases: kube-system/sample-controller
    coordination.k8s.io/compatibility-version: "1.29"
  name: sample-controller-0001A
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  holderIdentity: sample-controller-0001A
  leaseDurationSeconds: 10
  renewTime: "2023-12-05T02:33:08.685777Z"
```

A component identity lease announces candidacy for leadership by including
`coordination.k8s.io/can-lead-leases` it is identity lease. If the lease
expires, the component is considered unavailable for leader election purposes.

### Coordinated Election Controller

A Coordinated Election Controller will reconcile component Leader Leases
(primary resource) and Identity Leases (secondary resource, changes trigger
reconciliation of related leader leases).

Coordinated Election Controller reconciliation loop:

- If no leader lease exists for a components:
  - Elect leader from candidates by preparing a freshly renewed lease with:
    - `spec.holderIdentity` set to the identity of the elected leader
    - `coordination.k8s.io/elected-by: leader-election-controller` (to make
      lease types easy to disambiguate)
- If there is a better candidate than current leader:

>   - Sets `coordination.k8s.io/end-of-term: true` on the leader lease, signaling

Reviewer 2: this requires all older client-go to have migrated to the version which has the impl. Is that the right way to think? The example works with the lease object, but i think given all candidates have to express their availability and then a central authority picks the right candidate, there is a need to create another object type that contains all candidates.

  name: sample-controller
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  holderIdentity: controller-a
  leaseDurationSeconds: 10
  leaseTransitions: 0
  renewTime: "2023-12-05T18:58:31.295467Z"
```

The Coordinated Election Controller will run in the kube-apiserver.

The apiserver runs very few controllers, and they are not elected, but instead
all run concurrently in HA configurations.  Because of this, controller in the
apiserver must make careful use of concurrency control primitives to ensure
multiple instances collaborate, not fight. This is discussed in depth in the
below design details.

### Coordinated Lease Lock

A new `resourceLock` type of `coordinatedleases`, and `CoordinatedLeaseLock`
implementation of `resourcelock.Interface` will be added to client-go that:

- Creates Identity Lease when ready to be Leader
	- Renews identity lease periodically
- Watches Leader Lease, waiting to be elected leader by the Coordinated Election Controller
- When it becomes leader:
  - Perform role of active component instance
  - Renew leader lease periodically
  - Stop renewing if lease is marked `coordination.k8s.io/end-of-term: true`
- If leader lease expires:

>   - Shutdown (yielding leadership) and restart as a candidate component instance

Reviewer: is this about shutting down and restarting a component instance as in e.g. a kube-* component restarting and obtaining a new PID when the component leader lease expires?
if yes, how?

i guess my confusion comes from that fact that this is under client-go.

Author: The exit() happens in the app code:
- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/741fd84d1570caecc533152d3c6c9da6f5de8c4e/cmd/kube-scheduler/app/server.go#L239
- https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/741fd84d1570caecc533152d3c6c9da6f5de8c4e/cmd/kube-controller-manager/app/controllermanager.go#L303

Users of client-go don't necessarily need to follow this approach, but it's what we've used for the core controller managers..

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Started] -->|Create Identity Lease| B
    B[Candidate] --> |Elected| C[Leader]
    C --> |Renew Leader Lease| C
    C -->|End of Term / Leader Lease Expired| D[Shutdown]
    D[Shutdown] -.-> |Restart| A
```

### Enabling on a component

Components with a `--leader-elect-resource-lock` flag (kube-controller-manager,
 kube-scheduler) will accept `coordinatedleases` as a resource lock type.

> ### Migrations

Reviewer 2: there was a migration from configmap to endpoints and to lease objects. Would the path of this migration different from those?

Author: This is simpler.  Since we can continue to use the exact same lease objects, the migrations only requires that both the old and new way of leasing are non-conflicting. I.e. if some controllers are trying to claim the lease the old way, and some controllers are trying to get elected the new way, that everything "just works"-- which it does.

So long as the API server is running a coordinated election controller, it is
safe to directly migrate a component from Lease Based Leader Election to

> Coordinated Leader Election (or vis-versa).

Reviewer: just to double check,

kubeadm today does not follow the upgrade skew policy correctly.
it has a bit of a legacy mechanism.

what happens during upgrade on a control plane node today is that all control plane components receive new configuration and are restarted by the kubelet (as satatic pods), not in a sequence but randomly, determining by the pod sanbox in the kubelet.

in such a scenario, on the first CP node, a KCM and/or a kube-scheduler could be with the `--leader-elect-resource-lock=coordinatedleases` configuration opted-in already started, yet not a single kube-apiserver instance will support the coordinated LE yet in this HA setup, because e.g. the new kube-apiserver on that same node starts slower.

i assume that would not be a problem?

Reviewer 4: I believe with our current approach KCM/kube-scheduler will not be able to be leader until the new kube-apiserver instance is ready. KCM will be unable to write its identity lease and will not be eligible for leader. This is similar to how it today though right? If kube-apiserver is starting and KCM cannot read the Lease object, they will not be able to make a decision on being the leader.

In an HA environment, this is unaffected since during an upgrade of one control plane instance, another healthy control plane KCM/kube-scheduler will take over.

| --------------- | -------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Lock Type       | Lease                            | Lease                                                                          |
| Claimed by      | Component instance               | Election Coordinator. (Lease is claimed for to the elected component instance) |
| Renewed by      | Component instance               | Component instance                                                             |
| Leader Criteria | First component to claim lease   | Best leader from available candidates at time of election                      |
| Preemptable     | No                               | Yes, Collaboratively. (Coordinator marks lease as "end of term". Component instance voluntarily stops renewing) |

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

A cluster administrator upgrades a cluster's control plane node-by-node,
expecting version skew to be respected.

- When the first and second nodes are upgraded, any components that were leaders

>   will typically loose the lease during the node downtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  will typically lose the lease during the node downtime
```

>   - If one happens to retain it's lease, it will be preempted by the coordinated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If one happens to retain its lease, it will be preempted by the coordinated
```

>     election controller after it updates it's identity lease with new version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    election controller after it updates its identity lease with new version
```

    information
- When the third node is upgraded, all components will be at the new version and one
  will be elected

> #### Story 2

Reviewer 2: could this scenario be added as a potential story https://docs.google.com/document/d/1x9RNaaysyO0gXHIr1y50QFbiL1x8OWnk2v3XnrdkT5Y/edit#heading=h.9p525fj57pix

Author: Absolutely. I'll add it in. Thanks!

  components will be elected.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Risk: Amount of writes performed by leader election increases substantially

This enhancement introduces an identity lease for each instance of each component.

Example:

- HA cluster with 3 control plane nodes
- 3 elected components (kube-controller-manager, schedule, cloud-controller-manager) per control plane node
- 9 identity leases are created and renewed by the components

Introducing this feature is roughtly equivalent to adding the same lease load
as adding 9 nodes to a kubernetes cluster.

The [API Server Identity enhancement](../1965-kube-apiserver-identity) also
introduces similar leases. For comparison, in a HA cluster with 3 control plane
nodes, API Server Identity adds 3 leases.

This risk can be migitated by scale testing and, if needed, extending the lease
duration and renewal times to reduce writes/s.

> #### Risk: leases watches increases apiserver load substantially

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Risk: lease watches increase apiserver load substantially
```

The [Unknown Version Interoperability Proxy (UVIP) enhancement](../4020-unknown-version-interoperability-proxy) also adds
lease watches on [API Server Identity](../1965-kube-apiserver-identity) leases in the kube-system namespace.
This enhancement would increase the expected number of resources being watched from ~3 (for UVIP) to ~12.

#### Risk: We have to "start over" and build confidence in a new leader election algorithm

We've built confidence in the existing leasing algorithm, through an investment
of engineering effort, and in core hours testing it and running it in production.

Changing the algorithm "resets the clock" and forces us to rebuild confidence on
the new algorithm.

The goal of this proposal is to minimize this risk by reusing as much of the
existing lease algorithm as possible:

- Renew leases in exactly the same way as before
- Leases can never be claimed by another leader until a lease expires

#### Risk: How is the election controller elected?

It's not. It will run directly in the apiserver. The apiserver runs very few controllers, and they are not elected, but instead all run concurrently in HA configurations.  

> Requires the election controller make careful use concurrency control primitives to ensure multiple instances collaborate, not fight.*

Reviewer 2: i feel that today the fight happens only once based on optimistic concurrency. That allows more quick response for candidates. In a centrally coordinated system, the candidates may churn for some reason and the central component may lag significantly.

Author: This is a good point.  

Some algorithms add a "election term" which delays the election by a lease duration. If we did this we'd double our expected recovery time.

I'm hoping to avoid that and just have the election controller use it's current known list of candidates (based on lease watches) at the time of lease expiration to immediately selected a new leader. and claim the lease on that leaders behalf  There is then a short delay while the selected leader watches the lease and realizes it's been elected.

Given that the current election approach is polling.. if we instead use watches we might actually be faster (but not faster than if we switched the existing approach to use watches).

Integration tests allow control of the configuration parameters used to start the binaries under test.
This is different from e2e tests which do not allow configuration of parameters.
Doing this allows testing non-default options and multiple different and potentially conflicting command line options.
-->

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

- `test/integration/coordinatedleaderelection`: TODO
- <test>: <link to test coverage>

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

- `test/e2e/apimachinery/coordinatedleaderelection.go`: TODO

> - <test>: <link to test coverage>

Reviewer: i think we can actually e2e test upgrades with this by using kOps, CAPI or the kubeadm's test kit.
all controller scenarios can be covered in test/e2e, while a full node upgraded can cover say only the main expectations. 

the kubeadm option is not my favorite for this at it will be a bit hacky with bash calls to `kubeadm ...`, `kubectl` and `grep`, but i think it's doable.

if you'd like to have such tests, let's discuss it later.

Author: +100, we're very interested in this.  There are [similar testing needs](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/8694b157f19dd82afc8547f5f3b9f49e6854c2a6/keps/sig-architecture/4330-compatibility-versions/README.md#e2e-tests) for the compatibility versions KEP.

- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

When evaluating alternatives, note that if we decide in the future to improve
the algorithm, fix a bug in the algorithm, or change the criteria for how
leaders are elected, our decision on where to put the code has a huge impact our
how the change is rolled out.

For example, it will be much easier change in a controller in the kube-apiserver
than in client-go library code distributed to elected controllers, because once
it is distributed into controllers, especially 3rd party controllers, any change
requires updating client-go and then updating all controllers to that version of
client-go.

### Component instances pick a leader without a coordinator

- A candidates is picked at random to be an election coordinator, and the
   coordinator picks the leader:
  - Components race to claim the lease
  - If a component claims the lease, the first thing it does is check the
    identity leases to see if there is a better leader

>   - If it finds a better lease, it assigns the lease to that component instead

Reviewer 2: what happens when a better leader appears later. Is there preemption?

Author: Yes.  The preemption is collaborative/non-byzantine.  The way it works is that the election controller writes a "end of term" marker on the lease.  When the current leader sees this, it stops renewing the lease and it expires.  Once the lease expires,  a new election can start.  "end of term"  is only considered valid on a non-expired lease, so once a lease expires, the next time the lease is claimed, "end of term" can be cleared.

There is some lag in this approach, but it's easy to reason about the correctness...

- Once one of the components updates its identity lease with new version
  information, the coordinated election controller will preempt the current
  leader so that this lower version component becomes leader.
- When the remaining two nodes can rollback, the first node will typically
  remain leader, but if a new election occurs, the available older version
  components will be elected.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Risk: Amount of writes performed by leader election increases substantially

This enhancement introduces an identity lease for each instance of each
component.

Example:

- HA cluster with 3 control plane nodes
- 3 elected components (kube-controller-manager, schedule,
  cloud-controller-manager) per control plane node
- 9 identity leases are created and renewed by the components

Introducing this feature is roughtly equivalent to adding the same lease load as

> adding 9 nodes to a kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer 5: This statement assumes that the "update period" is equivalent for node lease and for leader election. This is generally not true:
(a) we're using 10s for NodeLease
(b) we're using often 1s for leader-election

So it's more like adding 90 nodes - that's a huge difference.

I will just add one more data-point. If we assume few more components (most of providers actually have at least few other leader-elected components), then in relatively idle small cluster, even currently reducing leader-election renew interval from 1s to 10s is reducing the overall cpu load by 5%+. That's huge.
So I guess that introducing this mechanism would result in making this 15%+...

As long as I like this feature, I'm slightly worried that running even a small idle cluster is becoming more and more expensive and we're slowly moving towards a direction that even running a small idle cluster will require a beefy machine for the control-plane.
I would like us to explore a bit what we can do to optimize it. I'm not saying that it's the right model, but maybe a more interactive model like that could work:
- an instance creates its identity lease on start and refreshes it very infrequently (like once 1h or sh)
- when the controller is supposed to elect the leader it updates the AreYouStillAround bit on all identity leases
- in reaction to that instances update those identitiy leases
- elector wait up to say 5s for these to be updated (or if all are updated) and then chooses the new leader

That hugely reduces the load on these and rely more on watches.

Thoughts?

Reviewer 4: That's a good point. Or even something along the lines of identity leases only updating themselves after seeing an end-of-term marker on the current lease.

I do see some potential caveats with the interactive model, though it's more of a tradeoff that we need to evaluate.
- we would have a slower transition time when a leader is lost (1s vs 5s or whatever we set the interval to).
- It's possible to be stuck in an infinite preemption loop if the best candidate for the lease is a slow writer (obviously an extreme edge case, but worth pointing out). The leader election controller will see that the best candidate did not update their identity lease in time for the new leader election and will elect one of the other candidates. After the candidate is selected and started, the best candidate updates their identity lease. The leader election controller will see that a better candidate is available and update the component lease with an `end-of-term` marker. After the lease expires the process is repeated. I think we would need to be careful in how we select how long to wait for the "acks" from the identity leases, but otherwise this seems like a sound approach

Alternatively, what's stopping us from using the same 10s interval for leader-election or an interval 1s < x < 10s?

Reviewer 5: I fully agree with the interactive approach having drawbacks, as you pointed out. And I'm not attached to it - I just want to explore options to find something that is "cheaper".

Reducing leader-election interval means that in case of failure/crash/whatever, we stuck without the leader for a longer time. Also - operators do choose those interval themselves, so while we control defaults, we don't control what exactly will be used. So I don't think it's a real solution here.

Going back to the concerns of slow-writer - I think it will be problematic in general for leader-election. So I'm not entirely sure if the consequences of that mode aren't even more serious than you wrote, even for the default lgorithm.
But let's explore a slightly different one:
- the identity lease is updated very infrequently by the instance and has a long expiration (say 1m or sth like that)
- if a controller needs to elect new leader, it looks at all "healthy" ones [some of these may no longer be though]
- it chooses one, but then it's supposed to confirm it's healthiness quickly (in the next 5s or sth)
- if it doesn't confirm, new leader is elected soon after
In this case, the healthy case remains as it was before, in the unhelathy case (the newly elected leader in fact wasn't healthy), we have an additional turnaround, but that should be fairly rare situation...

Reviewer 5: [Again, I'm not saying this one is the right model either - all I'm trying to do is to brainstorm ideas and try to figure out something that will be "cheaper"]

Reviewer 4: > Reducing leader-election interval means that in case of failure/crash/whatever, we stuck without the leader for a longer time. Also - operators do choose those interval themselves, so while we control defaults, we don't control what exactly will be used. 

Introducing coordinated leader election creates two configurable intervals:
- Leader election renewal interval (For a candidate that has already been selected as leader to continue leading)
- Candidate lease renewal interval (For candidates to advertise they're available)

The concern with the high amount of writes is attached to the candidate lease renewal interval. One proposal is to increase candidate lease renewal interval while maintaining a low leader election renewal interval.

I agree that slow-writer is a problem in general. The interactive approach is quite promising, I wanted to point out the drawbacks so we have an awareness of them.

>the identity lease is updated very infrequently by the instance and has a long expiration (say 1m or sth like that)
 +1, note that even without the interactive approach, maintaining the leader lease to have a lower refresh time allows us to transition quick fast. 

I talked to Joe about this and the interactive approach is a good way to reduce write overhead. Will update the KEP to reflect this new approach.

But a node-by-node upgrade or rollback does not achieve this today.

- For 3 node control plane upgrade, there is about a 25% chance of a new version
  of the controller running while old versions of the apiserver are active,
  resulting in a skew violation. (Consider case where the 2nd node upgraded has
  the lease)
- For rollback, it is almost a certainty that skew will be violated.

There is also the possiblity that the lease will be lost by a leader during an
upgrade or rollback resulting in the version of the controller flip-flopping
between old and new.

### Goals

During HA upgrades/rollbacks/downgrades, 

Leader elected components:

- Change versions at predictable times
- Do not violate version skew, even during node-by-node rollbacks

The control plane:

- Can safely canary components and nodes at the new version for an extended
  period of time, or to pause an upgrade at any step durning an upgrade. This
  enhancement, combined with
  [UVIP](../4020-unknown-version-interoperability-proxy) helps achieve this.
  

### Non-Goals

- Change the default leader election for components.

## Proposal

- Offer an opt-in leader election mechanism to:

>   - Elect the candidate with the oldest version available.

Reviewer 6: why is it a good idea to hardcode this? Makes the mechanism very specific for Kube components with kube's upgrade policy.

Alternatives:
1. let the instances race for being the election coordinator and implement the selection logic in the instances.
2. use some more universal scoring mechanism, like an integer score.

Reviewer 4: I agree this mechanism is very specific for kube components and upgrade policy. This was the intent of the feature though, to deterministic pick a leader while respecting version skew specifically during a rolling upgrade where mixed version components are possible.

Open to discussing alternatives but is there a particular use case you had in mind around something using this that isn't kube component/upgrade policy specific?

Reviewer 6: Many components have similar requirements and suffer the same problems. Think of OpenShift apiservers and controllers, or Crossplane instances. Everything that provides APIs (e.g. by installing CRDs) or webhooks (admission, conversion) should likely be always the newest version (provider), while controllers should be the oldest (consumers).

With that having said, wondering whether providers are usually subject of leader election. In kube the apiservers are not, neither in OpenShift. But potentially there is this proxying happening between them like in kube. Could also be that ordering of complete deployments is actually what one wants, which obviously is out of scope for this KEP.

What I mean with scoring:
```
v1.23.2 => 12302 # newest wins
v1.23.2 => 87697 # oldest wins
```
Of course, one could fake versions too and get the same behaviour:
```
v1.23.2 => v8.76.97
```

tl/dr: we don't lose anything technically speaking by having just kube's logic. If we turned this into a full (non-annotation) API, one could have `preference: Oldest`.

Reviewer 4: That's true. I think we need separate mechanisms for handling each of the cases listed, for instance [UVIP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/4020-unknown-version-interoperability-proxy) targets mixed version apiservers with the proxying. Coordinated Leader Election specifically targets leader elected components. Ordering of complete deployments is an interesting idea that probably deserves its own KEP. 

We have explored the scoring idea a bit. IIUC, the client would determine ordering by publishing something like an int in its component lease, and the leader elector can simply pick the largest number. I slightly prefer doing the ordering selection in one centralized place such that if we were to change algorithms, clients are not all expected to update and we can update it server side. If this is done server side, I feel like the conversion vs a comparison logic is quite similar in complexity, but using the versions (1.23.2) instead of the scoring numbers (87697) feels a bit more readable to a human. It could be argued that scoring would be better if we were to calculate this off of multiple fields though and leads to a discussion around extensibility.

re: `preference: Oldest`: IMO this is an extensibility discussion. For the use case we are trying to solve with version skew we are targeting the oldest for all leader elected components. As for `whether providers are usually subject of leader election`, I don't see any examples in kube although that doesn't eliminate the possibility from downstream components from specific providers. @jpbetz have you explored this area? If we were to support the `preferences: XX` option, that also enables the possibility of using addition fields as part of tiebreakers/selection. For instance, looking at the component lease id, etc. I don't mind supporting additional preferences, but I'd like to see a more concrete use case first to ensure supporting extensibility is valuable.

Author: I agree that this KEP doesn't solve for the general ordering problems of upgrade orchistration. It's a specific utility that can be useful in specific cases that we see in the ecosystem (kubeadm, ...).

How extensible we make this is something I've only thought about briefly.  I consider `preference: Oldest` to be the most urgently needed option, but I can see utility in preferring newest, preferring a canary instance with some difference in configuration (for 3rd party use cases in particularly), and for preferring a specific controller, purely as a debugging tool ("Somethings wrong, as a cluster admin, I'd like to change KCM leader to X to see what happens").

Reviewer 5: I would definitely like to see more extensibility here - I can definitely imagine cases where we control compatibility story and can guarantee forward compatibility, but we want to limit the number of reelections (e.g. don't have 3 reelections during upgrade, but immediately change to the newest one) because e.g. initialization is very slow or sth like that.
[The current example where this may be the case is cluster-autoscaler].

So yes - can we please add a user-story along those lines and add Beta criteria to reevaluate extensibility?

Author: I do expect the extensibility story for this KEP to expand.  Are we OK with making that a beta criteria and focusing on it then?  I feel like having "prefer oldest" as the default functionality for alpha is forward progress and gives us a clear focus for the beta work.

  - Provide a way to preempt the current leader.
  - Reuse the existing lease mechanism as much as possible.

### Component Identity Leases

Components will create identity leases similar to those used by apiserver
identity, e.g.:

```yaml
apiVersion: coordination.k8s.io/v1
kind: Lease
metadata:
  annotations:
    coordination.k8s.io/binary-version: "1.29"
    coordination.k8s.io/can-lead-leases: kube-system/some-custom-controller
    coordination.k8s.io/compatibility-version: "1.29"
  name: some-custom-controller-0001A
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  holderIdentity: some-custom-controller-0001A
  leaseDurationSeconds: 10
  renewTime: "2023-12-05T02:33:08.685777Z"
```

A component identity lease announces candidacy for leadership by including

> `coordination.k8s.io/can-lead-leases` it is identity lease. If the lease

Reviewer 6: Cannot parse that sentence.

Reviewer 4: fixed

Coordinated Election Controller reconciliation loop:

- If no leader lease exists for a components:
  - Elect leader from candidates by preparing a freshly renewed lease with:
    - `spec.holderIdentity` set to the identity of the elected leader
    - `coordination.k8s.io/elected-by: leader-election-controller` (to make
      lease types easy to disambiguate)
- If there is a better candidate than current leader:
  - Sets `coordination.k8s.io/end-of-term: true` on the leader lease, signaling
    that the leader should stop renewing the lease and yield leadership

```mermaid
flowchart TD
   A[Reconcile] --> |Process Leader Lease| B
   B{Lease Status?} --> |Better Leader Exists| D
   B --> |Expired/Missing| E
   D[End Lease Term]
   E[Elect Leader]
```

Example of a lease created by Coordinated Election Controller:

```yaml
apiVersion: coordination.k8s.io/v1
kind: Lease
metadata:
  annotations:
    coordination.k8s.io/elected-by: coordinated-election-controller
  name: some-custom-controller
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  holderIdentity: controller-a
  leaseDurationSeconds: 10
  leaseTransitions: 0
  renewTime: "2023-12-05T18:58:31.295467Z"
```

> The Coordinated Election Controller will run in the kube-apiserver.

Reviewer 6: ... which turns this mechanism into a full API. Why use annotations so heavily?

Reviewer 4: It allows us to reuse the existing lease mechanism as much as possible. We make use of all Lease fields for component leases, and it seems better to reuse + add annotations rather than introduce a new similar type.

Reviewer 6: Not a new type, but extend it to cover the use-case. Using annotations is cheap, but pretty much an Kubernetes API anti-pattern.

Reviewer 4: ack, we'll get rid of the annotations and extend the Lease API fields instead.

In an HA configuration, the Coordinated Leader Election Controller will have its
own lease similar to how other leader elected controllers behaves today. It will
be responsible for renewing its own lease and gracefully shutdown if the lease

> is expired. Only one instance of the coordinated leader election controller will

Reviewer 6: does this matter? If the logic is deterministic and we make use of optimistic concurrency cleverly, we wouldn't need any coordination of the election coordinators, would we?

#### Running the coordinated leader election controller in KCM

Since the coordinated leader election controller is a controller that is
elected, it would also make sense to run in KCM. However, a major drawback is
that KCM forcefully shuts down when it loses the leader lock and it is possible
that the leader election controller on the same KCM instance is the leader at
that time. This causes the coordinated leader election controller to change
leaders which could cause disruptions.

Two ways to solve this are to gracefully shutdown the KCM and fork the process
such that the coordinated leader election controller is unaffected. Gracefully
shutting down the KCM is difficult as controllers are used to the KCM forcefully
shutting them, and we have no guarantee that third party controllers do not rely
on this "feature". Forking the process causes additional overhead that we'd like
to avoid.

#### Running the coordinated leader election controller in a new container

Instead of running in KCM, the coordinated leader election controller could be
run in a new container (eg: `kube-coordinated-leader-election`). There will be a

> large memory footprint with this approach and adding a new component to the

Reviewer 6: "large" is a big word. This controller is super small. But clearly the change controlplane topology is undesired.

Reviewer 4: ack, updated the wording

control plane could change our Kubernetes architecture in an undesirable way.

### Component instances pick a leader without a coordinator

- A candidates is picked at random to be an election coordinator, and the
   coordinator picks the leader:
  - Components race to claim the lease
  - If a component claims the lease, the first thing it does is check the
    identity leases to see if there is a better leader
  - If it finds a better lease, it assigns the lease to that component instead
    of itself

Pros: 
  - No coordinated election controller

Cons: 

  - All component instances must watch the identity leases
  - All components must have the code to decide which component is the best

>     leader

Reviewer 6: do we think about more than 3 kcms and 3 ks? "All component" sounds like many. Why is kcm and ks watching some resource bad?

Reviewer 4: addon manager and custom leader elected components is what comes to mind. Agree this should not be "all components". It's not bad, just adds additional complexity over the current best approach.

A new `resourceLock` type of `coordinatedleases`, and `CoordinatedLeaseLock`
implementation of `resourcelock.Interface` will be added to client-go that:

- Creates Identity Lease when ready to be Leader
- Renews identity lease periodically
- Watches its identity lease for the `coordination.k8s.io/pending-ack` annotation and updates to remove it
- Watches Leader Lease, waiting to be elected leader by the Coordinated Election
  Controller
- When it becomes leader:
  - Perform role of active component instance
  - Renew leader lease periodically
  - Stop renewing if lease is marked `coordination.k8s.io/end-of-term: true`
- If leader lease expires:
  - Shutdown (yielding leadership) and restart as a candidate component instance

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Started] -->|Create Identity Lease| B
    B[Candidate] --> |Elected| C[Leader]
    C --> |Renew Leader Lease| C
    C -->|End of Term / Leader Lease Expired| D[Shutdown]
    D[Shutdown] -.-> |Restart| A
```

### Renewal Interval and Performance
The leader lease will have similar renewal interval and duration (2s and 15s).

For component leases, keeping a short renewal interval will add many unnecessary writes to the apiserver.

> The component leases renewal interval will default to 30s.

Reviewer 5: Given that we will be setting the `'ending-ack` annotation and waiting for explicit ACK on it, the 30s reneval period seems very low to me. I would rather target something in the order of 30m or sth - given the ACk mechanism below, we don't gain pretty much anything from those frequent periodic refreshes.

Reviewer 4: I've set it to 5 minutes for now because that's the default resync period for the informer cache. Is that fine?

#### Risk: Amount of writes performed by leader election increases substantially

This enhancement introduces an identity lease for each instance of each
component.

Example:

- HA cluster with 3 control plane nodes
- 3 elected components (kube-controller-manager, schedule,
  cloud-controller-manager) per control plane node
- 9 identity leases are created and renewed by the components

Introducing this feature is roughtly equivalent to adding the same lease load as
adding 9 nodes to a kubernetes cluster.

The [API Server Identity enhancement](../1965-kube-apiserver-identity) also
introduces similar leases. For comparison, in a HA cluster with 3 control plane
nodes, API Server Identity adds 3 leases.

This risk can be migitated by scale testing and, if needed, extending the lease
duration and renewal times to reduce writes/s.

#### Risk: lease watches increase apiserver load substantially

The [Unknown Version Interoperability Proxy (UVIP)
enhancement](../4020-unknown-version-interoperability-proxy) also adds lease
watches on [API Server Identity](../1965-kube-apiserver-identity) leases in the
kube-system namespace. This enhancement would increase the expected number of

> resources being watched from ~3 (for UVIP) to ~12.

Reviewer 5: I don't understand why 12. Given that every "lease candidate" is now watching it lease, we're effectively talking about having a watch for every "lease candidate". So with CP with 3 instances, it's effectively 3 per component - and there are usually visibly more than 3 components.

Reviewer 4: Updated, yes you're correct this was outdated.

- For 3 node control plane upgrade, there is about a 25% chance of a new version
  of the controller running while old versions of the apiserver are active,
  resulting in a skew violation. (Consider case where the 2nd node upgraded has
  the lease)
- For rollback, it is almost a certainty that skew will be violated.

There is also the possiblity that the lease will be lost by a leader during an
upgrade or rollback resulting in the version of the controller flip-flopping
between old and new.

### Goals

During HA upgrades/rollbacks/downgrades, 

Leader elected components:

- Change versions at predictable times
- Do not violate version skew, even during node-by-node rollbacks

The control plane:

- Can safely canary components and nodes at the new version for an extended
  period of time, or to pause an upgrade at any step during an upgrade. This
  enhancement, combined with
  [UVIP](../4020-unknown-version-interoperability-proxy) helps achieve this.
  

### Non-Goals

- Change the default leader election for components.

## Proposal

- Offer an opt-in leader election mechanism to:
  - Elect the candidate with the oldest version available.

>   - Provide a way to preempt the current leader.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  - Provide a way to preempt the current leader on the upcoming expiry of the term.
```

Reviewer 6: this clarification is still pending. I would still read the text in a way that preempting happens immediately, not by term end.

Reviewer 4: oops sorry I missed this, fixed.

  - Reuse the existing lease mechanism as much as possible.

### Component Lease Candidates

Components will create lease candidates similar to those used by apiserver
identity. Some key differences are certain fields like `LeaseTransitions` and `HolderIdentity` are removed.
See the API section for the full API.

 e.g.:

```yaml
apiVersion: coordination.k8s.io/v1
kind: LeaseCandidate
metadata:
  labels:
    binary-version: "1.29"
    compatibility-version: "1.29"
  name: some-custom-controller-0001A
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  canLeadLease: kube-system/some-custom-controller
  leaseDurationSeconds: 10
  renewTime: "2023-12-05T02:33:08.685777Z"
```

> A component identity lease announces candidacy for leadership by including the 
> `can-lead-lease` label in its identity lease. If the lease
> expires, the component is considered unavailable for leader election purposes.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A component identity lease announces candidacy for leadership by specifying 
`spec.canLeadLease`. If the lease
expires, the component is considered unavailable for leader election purposes.
```

### Coordinated Election Controller

A new Coordinated Election Controller will reconcile component leader `Lease`s

> (primary resource) and Identity Leases (secondary resource, changes trigger

Reviewer 6: `LeaseCandiate`s

> (primary resource) and Identity Leases (secondary resource, changes trigger

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
(primary resource) and I`LeaseCandiate`s (secondary resource, changes trigger
```

kind: Lease
metadata:
  annotations:
    coordination.k8s.io/elected-by: coordinated-election-controller
  name: some-custom-controller
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  holderIdentity: controller-a
  leaseDurationSeconds: 10
  leaseTransitions: 0
  renewTime: "2023-12-05T18:58:31.295467Z"
```

The Coordinated Election Controller will run in the kube-apiserver.

In an HA configuration, the Coordinated Leader Election Controller will have its
own lease similar to how other leader elected controllers behaves today. It will
be responsible for renewing its own lease and gracefully shutdown if the lease
is expired. Only one instance of the coordinated leader election controller will
be active at a time, and this prevents instances of the coordinated leader
election controller from interfering with each other. Unlike in KCM, the
coordinated leader election controller must gracefully shutdown and restart as
it will be running in the kube-apiserver and calling `os.Exit()` is not an
option.

### Coordinated Lease Lock

A new `resourceLock` type of `coordinatedleases`, and `CoordinatedLeaseLock`
implementation of `resourcelock.Interface` will be added to client-go that:

> - Creates Identity Lease when ready to be Leader

Reviewer 6: `LeaseCandidate`

- Renews identity lease periodically

> - Watches its identity lease for the `coordination.k8s.io/pending-ack` annotation and updates to remove it

Reviewer 6: Just a guess, but the text seems to be not consistent currently: only cause per-compoent write operations on leader change, and get rid of the `LeaseCandidate.spec.renewTime`?

> - Watches its identity lease for the `coordination.k8s.io/pending-ack` annotation and updates to remove it

Reviewer 4: which part? We will still be renewing at a very infrequent interval so the renewTime should still be useful? Having the `renewTime` helps with pruning old LeaseCandidate leases that may have cleaned up improperly. 

This step allows us to have a infrequent renewal interval for LeaseCandidate leases while still maintaining the ability to quickly switch leaders and find the correct set of eligible candidates when a leader switch is needed.

- KIND

To respect the [Kubernetes skew
policy](https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/):

- Upgrades should keep controller managers and schedulers at the *old* version
  until all apiservers are upgraded.
- Rollbacks should rollback controller managers and schedulers at the *old*
  version before any apiservers are rolledback.

But a node-by-node upgrade or rollback does not achieve this today.

- For 3 node control plane upgrade, there is about a 25% chance of a new version
  of the controller running while old versions of the apiserver are active,
  resulting in a skew violation. (Consider case where the 2nd node upgraded has
  the lease)
- For rollback, it is almost a certainty that skew will be violated.

There is also the possiblity that the lease will be lost by a leader during an
upgrade or rollback resulting in the version of the controller flip-flopping
between old and new.

### Goals

During HA upgrades/rollbacks/downgrades, 

Leader elected components:

- Change versions at predictable times
- Do not violate version skew, even during node-by-node rollbacks

The control plane:

- Can safely canary components and nodes at the new version for an extended

>   period of time, or to pause an upgrade at any step durning an upgrade. This

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  period of time, or to pause an upgrade at any step during an upgrade. This
```

  enhancement, combined with
  [UVIP](../4020-unknown-version-interoperability-proxy) helps achieve this.
  

### Non-Goals

- Change the default leader election for components.

## Proposal

- Offer an opt-in leader election mechanism to:
  - Elect the candidate with the oldest version available.
  - Provide a way to preempt the current leader.
  - Reuse the existing lease mechanism as much as possible.

### Component Identity Leases

Components will create identity leases similar to those used by apiserver
identity, e.g.:

```yaml
apiVersion: coordination.k8s.io/v1
kind: IdentityLease
metadata:
  labels:
    can-lead-lease: kube-system/some-custom-controller
  name: some-custom-controller-0001A
  namespace: kube-system
  binary-version: "1.29"

>   compatibility-version: "1.29"

Reviewer 6: what are these two? To be moved to spec? Or annotations?

Reviewer 4: moved to spec, thanks for catching this.

spec:
  holderIdentity: some-custom-controller-0001A
  leaseDurationSeconds: 10
  renewTime: "2023-12-05T02:33:08.685777Z"
```

A component identity lease announces candidacy for leadership by including the 
`can-lead-lease` label in its identity lease. If the lease
expires, the component is considered unavailable for leader election purposes.

### Coordinated Election Controller

> A new Coordinated Election Controller will reconcile component Leader Leases
> (primary resource) and Identity Leases (secondary resource, changes trigger
> reconciliation of related leader leases).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A new Coordinated Election Controller will reconcile component leader `Lease`s
(primary resource) and `IdentityLease`s (secondary resource, changes trigger
reconciliation of related leader leases).
```

makes it easier to read.

Coordinated Election Controller reconciliation loop:

> - If no leader lease exists for a components:
>   - Elect leader from candidates by preparing a freshly renewed lease with:
>     - `spec.holderIdentity` set to the identity of the elected leader
>     - `coordination.k8s.io/elected-by: leader-election-controller` (to make
>       lease types easy to disambiguate)
> - If there is a better candidate than current leader:
>   - Sets `endofterm: true` on the leader lease, signaling
>     that the leader should stop renewing the lease and yield leadership

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- If no leader `Lease` exists for a components:
  - Elect leader from candidates by preparing a freshly renewed `Lease` with:
    - `spec.holderIdentity` set to the identity of the elected leader
    - `coordination.k8s.io/elected-by: leader-election-controller` (to make
      lease types easy to disambiguate)
- If there is a better candidate than current leader:
  - Sets `endofterm: true` on the leader `Lease`, signaling
    that the leader should stop renewing the lease and yield leadership
```

For component leases, keeping a short renewal interval will add many unnecessary writes to the apiserver.
The component leases renewal interval will default to 30s.

When the leader lease is marked as end of term or available, the coordinated leader election controller will
add an annotation to all component leases `coordination.k8s.io/pending-ack` and wait up to 5 seconds. During that time, components must update their component lease to remove the annotation. The leader election controller will then pick the leader based on its criteria from the set of component leases that have ack'd the request.

### Enabling on a component

Components with a `--leader-elect-resource-lock` flag (kube-controller-manager,
 kube-scheduler) will accept `coordinatedleases` as a resource lock type.

### Migrations

So long as the API server is running a coordinated election controller, it is
safe to directly migrate a component from Lease Based Leader Election to
Coordinated Leader Election (or vis-versa).

During the upgrade, a mix of components will be running both election
approaches. When the leader lease expires, there are a couple possibilities:

> - A controller instance using Lease Based Leader Election claims the leader

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- A controller instance using `Lease`-based leader election claims the leader
```

try to keep capital/lower case consistent. Makes it easier to read.

There is one thing that could make migrations slightly cleaner: If Coordinated
Leader Election adds a `coordination.k8s.io/elected-by:
leader-election-controller` annotation to any leases that it claims. It can also
check for this annotation and only mark leases as "end-of-term" if that
annotation is present. Lease Based Leader Election would ignore "end-of-term"
annotations anyway, so this isn't strictly needed, but it would reduce writes
from the coordinated election controller to leases that were claimed by
component instances not using Coordinated Leader Election

### API

The lease lock API will be extended with a new field for election preference, denoted as an enum for strategies for Coordinated Leader Election.

```go

type CoordinatedLeaseStrategy string

// CoordinatedLeaseStrategy defines the strategy for picking the leader for coordinated leader election.
const (
  OldestCompatibilityVersionStrategy CoordinatedStrategy = "OldestCompatibilityVersionStrategy"
  NewestCompatibilityVersionStrategy CoordinatedStrategy = "NewestCompatibilityVersionStrategy"
)

type LeaseSpec struct {
	// Strategy indicates the strategy for picking the leader for coordinated leader election

> 	Strategy CoordinatedLeaseStrategy `json:"strategy,omitempty" protobuf:"string,6,opt,name=strategy"`

Reviewer 6: As this is in the existing `Lease` type, I would expect a defaulted value for the non-coordindated case, e.g. `NoCoordination`.

Who creates the initial value in the coordinated case? The election coordinator has to get it from somewhere. Is that a value for the `LeaseCandidacy`? But then what if those values don't agree for all candidates? Do we need an order?

Reviewer 4: Added a default value. We will create an ordering of values if they do not agree for all candidates.

Author: > Who creates the initial value in the coordinated case?

I was wondering the same. What actors in the system do we expect to be picking the `CoordinatedLeaseStrategy`?  If the controller implementation picks, then having the controllers write it to `IdentityLeases` and then deal with the case where the values don't agree for the candidates does seem like a possible approach.  It's more complex than I'd like though.

If the actor is not the controllers, what else would it be? I can imagine a election coordinator that has it's own configuration that it uses to make decisions, but that also starts to be significantly more complicated.

	// EndofTerm signals to a lease holder that the lease should not be
	// renewed because a better candidate is available.

> 	EndOfTerm bool `json:"endofterm,omitempty" protobuf:"boolean,7,opt,name=endofterm"`

Reviewer 6: There is no acknowledge of this, neither during the transition to coordinated leader election, but also in general. Am I right that we are introducing a race here with a possible time where two leaders might be active?

In the old `Lease` world, a controller could avoid the race by shutting down/pause its work before the lease expires while renewal fails. In the new world, eventually the `endOfTerm` happens at arbitrary times and the leader might not even see it and continue its work.

Hence, I feel like we need acknowledgement, i.e. the current leader must step down by unsetting `HolderIdentity`.

Reviewer 6: Oh, ic. Missed that. I thought it is an ask to give up the lease earlier.

Reviewer 4: It is an ask, but a controller can choose when to give it up. Controllers would need to shut down its work before giving up though so we're opting to have it act as a "do not renew" marker for now and it could be optimized in the future to release the lease sooner.

version to respect [Kubernetes component version skew
policy](https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/).

Strategy is an option specified by a `LeaseCandidate` object, in most cases the
controller responsible renewing the `LeaseCandidate` lease. The value for the
strategy between different `LeaseCandidate` objects leading the same `Lease`
should be the same, but during mixed version states, there is a possibility that
they may differ. We will use a consensus protocol that favors the algorithm with
the highest priority. The priority is a fixed list that is predetermined. For
now, this is `NoCoordination` > `MinimumCompatibilityVersion`. For example, if
three `LeaseCandidate` objects exist and two objects select
`MinimumCompatibilityVersion` while the third selects `NoCoordination`,
`NoCoordination` will take precedent and the coordinated leader election
controller will use `NoCoordination` as the election strategy. The final
strategy used will be written to the `Lease` object when the CLE controller
creates the `Lease` for a suitable leader. This has the benefit of providing
better debugging information and allows short circuiting of an election if the

> set of candidates and selected strategy is the same as before.

Author: Could we provide more detail on the alternatives considered for this section?

I'm not entirely confident that I'd like to invest in this approach, so I'd like to understand why we've eliminated other possible approaches.  For example, why don't we want to put the strategy directly on the lease resource?  Why don't we want to introduce a special object that declares the strategies to use? Why don't we want to make the strategy configurable by an apiserver flag?

Reviewer 4: Added. cc @sttts, hoping we can get consensus on how we want to move forward with this.

  period of time, or to pause an upgrade at any step during an upgrade. This
  enhancement, combined with
  [UVIP](../4020-unknown-version-interoperability-proxy) helps achieve this.
  

### Non-Goals

- Change the default leader election for components.

## Proposal

- Offer an opt-in leader election mechanism to:
  - Elect the candidate with the oldest version available.
  - Provide a way to preempt the current leader.
  - Reuse the existing lease mechanism as much as possible.

### Component Lease Candidates

Components will create lease candidates similar to those used by apiserver
identity. Some key differences are certain fields like `LeaseTransitions` and `HolderIdentity` are removed.
See the API section for the full API.

 e.g.:

```yaml
apiVersion: coordination.k8s.io/v1
kind: LeaseCandidate
metadata:
  labels:
    binary-version: "1.29"
    compatibility-version: "1.29"
  name: some-custom-controller-0001A
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  canLeadLease: kube-system/some-custom-controller
  leaseDurationSeconds: 10
  renewTime: "2023-12-05T02:33:08.685777Z"
```

A component "lease candidate" announces candidacy for leadership by specifying

> `spec.canLeadLease` in its lease candidate lease. If the lease expires, the

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`spec.canLeadLease` in its lease candidate lease. If the LeaseCandidate object expires, the
```

Reviewer 4: Fixed

```yaml
apiVersion: coordination.k8s.io/v1
kind: Lease
metadata:
  annotations:
    coordination.k8s.io/elected-by: coordinated-election-controller
  name: some-custom-controller
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  holderIdentity: controller-a
  leaseDurationSeconds: 10
  leaseTransitions: 0
  renewTime: "2023-12-05T18:58:31.295467Z"
```

The Coordinated Election Controller will run in the kube-apiserver.

In an HA configuration, the Coordinated Leader Election Controller will have its
own lease similar to how other leader elected controllers behaves today. It will
be responsible for renewing its own lease and gracefully shutdown if the lease
is expired. Only one instance of the coordinated leader election controller will
be active at a time, and this prevents instances of the coordinated leader
election controller from interfering with each other. Unlike in KCM, the
coordinated leader election controller must gracefully shutdown and restart as
it will be running in the kube-apiserver and calling `os.Exit()` is not an
option.

### Coordinated Lease Lock

A new `resourceLock` type of `coordinatedleases`, and `CoordinatedLeaseLock`

> implementation of `resourcelock.Interface` will be added to client-go that:

Reviewer 6: No sure I can parse the sentence. What's `coordinatedleases`?

Reviewer 4: The lock type passed to the leader election `client-go` library. https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/tools/leaderelection/resourcelock/interface.go#L36

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/staging/src/k8s.io/client-go/tools/leaderelection/leaderelection.go#L117-L118

This is an implementation detail that we probably could omit from the KEP

- Creates LeaseCandidate Lease when ready to be Leader

> - Renews LeaseCandidate lease very infrequently

Reviewer 6: what does this mean? The examples above have 10s.

Reviewer 4: 10s is for the leader Lease, LeaseCandidate objects will have an interval of 300s.

> - Watches its LeaseCandidate lease for the `coordination.k8s.io/pending-ack` annotation and updates to remove it

Reviewer 6: And updates its renew time?

Reviewer 4: Added

- Watches Leader Lease, waiting to be elected leader by the Coordinated Election
  Controller
- When it becomes leader:
  - Perform role of active component instance
  - Renew leader lease periodically

>   - Stop renewing if lease is marked `coordination.k8s.io/end-of-term: true`

Reviewer 4: fixed

- If leader lease expires:
  - Shutdown (yielding leadership) and restart as a candidate component instance

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Started] -->|Create LeaseCandidate Lease| B
    B[Candidate] --> |Elected| C[Leader]
    C --> |Renew Leader Lease| C
    C -->|End of Term / Leader Lease Expired| D[Shutdown]
    D[Shutdown] -.-> |Restart| A
```

### Renewal Interval and Performance

> The leader lease will have similar renewal interval and duration (2s and 15s).

Reviewer 6: similar to what?

Reviewer 4: similar the the current mechanism. Updated

For component leases, keeping a short renewal interval will add many unnecessary writes to the apiserver.
The component leases renewal interval will default to 5 mins.

When the leader lease is marked as end of term or available, the coordinated leader election controller will

> add an annotation to all component leases `coordination.k8s.io/pending-ack` and wait up to 5 seconds.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
add an annotation `coordination.k8s.io/pending-ack` to all `LeaseCandidate` objects and wait up to 5 seconds.
```

Reviewer 6: "component lease" reads strangely. The object is called `component lease candidate` above, i.e. those are `candidates`, not `leases`.

Reviewer 4: Fixed

Instead of having the LeaseCandidate controllers select the strategy, have the CLE controller directly select the strategy. This has the benefit that no client-go change is needed and bug fixes will land quicker via only kube-apiserver changes. Because the Lease object is created by the CLE controller, it must retrieve the default value for `Strategy` from somewhere. There are a couple other ways to populate the default value instead of via  the `LeaseCandidate`.

1. Via writes to the `Strategy` field in Lease

If the CLE controller always defaults to a value, a user may update the Lease
object to take on a different strategy.

```
kind: Lease
spec:
  strategy: "MaximumCompatibilityVersion"
```

For instance, the spec above may be server side applied after the creation of a
lease to change the strategy. The main drawback of this approach is that the
apply operation may only be performed AFTER the creation of a lease. Thus, there
will be some time that passes between when the strategy is updated from the
default strategy. There are concerns for having an ephemeral leader until the
strategy is fixed by the apply. This would involve the least amount of API

> changes though.

Reviewer 6: Can't one create a leader-less lease?

Reviewer 4: That's an interesting point. Essentially the candidates will make some kind of signal (assuming via annotation) that the CLE controller should create a Lease but not assign a leader.

I'm having some trouble envisioning concretely what that would look like in practice though. We'd need some kind of guarantee that the Lease will transition from leaderless to having a leader in a certain amount of time. If we rely on the user to update the strategy, that seems prone to delays and prolonged period of time with no leader. If it's done automatically, then it seems equivalent to one of the other methods where some component would be responsible for relaying the strategy to the Lease object. 

Do we have concrete use cases that we can walk through for users that don't want the default strategy of min compatibility version? Maybe that can guide us on the guarantee we provide to users.

Author: I was also wondering why the lease resource couldn't be created with the strategy set but in a not-yet-in-use-state.  If it's clearly expired when created, I don't see any problem creating it early for the purposes of setting a strategy.

Note that even if we did decide to go with a design where a separate resource is used to declare what strategy to sue for a lease, we still have ordering problems, and I'm not convinced the ordering problems we'd have if we introduce a new resource are any better than the ordering problems we have if we just put the strategy directly in the lease..  I currently favor this approach.

Reviewer 4: Updated with discussion with Joe. Now favoring only having the strategy in the `Lease` object.

@sttts: One difference from what we originally discussed is that we're favoring setting the strategy via a third party rather than having the lease candidates set them. This will completely avoid the ordering problem.

annotations anyway, so this isn't strictly needed, but it would reduce writes
from the coordinated election controller to leases that were claimed by
component instances not using Coordinated Leader Election

### API

The lease lock API will be extended with a new field for election preference, denoted as an enum for strategies for Coordinated Leader Election.

```go

type CoordinatedLeaseStrategy string

// CoordinatedLeaseStrategy defines the strategy for picking the leader for coordinated leader election.
const (
  OldestCompatibilityVersion CoordinatedStrategy = "OldestCompatibilityVersion"
  NoCoordination CoordinatedStrategy = "NoCoordination"
)

type LeaseSpec struct {
	// Strategy indicates the strategy for picking the leader for coordinated leader election
  // This is filled in from LeaseCandidate.Spec.Strategy or defaulted to NoCoordinationStrategy
  // if the leader was not elected by the CLE controller.
	Strategy CoordinatedLeaseStrategy `json:"strategy,omitempty" protobuf:"string,6,opt,name=strategy"`

	// EndofTerm signals to a lease holder that the lease should not be
	// renewed because a better candidate is available.

> 	EndOfTerm bool `json:"endofterm,omitempty" protobuf:"boolean,7,opt,name=endofterm"`

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
	EndOfTerm bool `json:"endOfTerm,omitempty" protobuf:"boolean,7,opt,name=endOfTerm"`
```
Note that booleans are discouraged in APIs. We likely have to think about a string enum.

Reviewer 4: Fixed casing. Can you elaborate on why bool is discouraged?

a node-by-node approach where all the component of a control plane node are
terminated together and then restarted at the new version. This process is
performed node-by-node across a high availability configuration. 

Systems using node-by-node upgrades:

- Cluster API
- kubeadm
- KIND

To respect the [Kubernetes skew policy](https://kubernetes.io/releases/version-skew-policy/):

- Upgrades should keep controller managers and schedulers at the *old* version until all apiservers
  are upgraded.
- Rollbacks should rollback controller managers and schedulers at the *old* version before any
  apiservers are rolledback.

But a node-by-node upgrade or rollback does not achieve this today.

- For upgrade, there is about a 25% chance of a new version of the controller
  running while old versions of the apiserver are active, resulting in a skew
  violation. (Consider case where the 2nd node upgraded has the lease)
- For rollback, it is almost a certainty that skew will be violated.

There is also the possiblity that the lease will be lost by a leader during an
upgrade or rollback resulting in the version of the controller flip-flopping
between old and new.

> ### Goals

Reviewer 7: I like this KEP because it also facilitates other potential optimizations like graceful and performant failover, which a component can utilize to warm up (e.g. start informers to pull k8s objects) before actually becoming the leader. I don't want to make this KEP more complex than it needs to be but if you think there is anything that can be covered for future extensions, it might be great.

Author: This is a good point.  I was hoping this would be a good building block for potential future work around leadership transitions and controller scaling (breaking controllers into smaller groups or sharding controllers..).  I'll add some of this to the future work section

all run concurrently in HA configurations.  Because of this, controller in the
apiserver must make careful use of concurrency control primitives to ensure
multiple instances collaborate, not fight. This is discussed in depth in the
below design details.

### Coordinated Lease Lock

A new `resourceLock` type of `coordinatedleases`, and `CoordinatedLeaseLock`
implementation of `resourcelock.Interface` will be added to client-go that:

- Creates Identity Lease when ready to be Leader
	- Renews identity lease periodically
- Watches Leader Lease, waiting to be elected leader by the Coordinated Election Controller
- When it becomes leader:
  - Perform role of active component instance
  - Renew leader lease periodically
  - Stop renewing if lease is marked `coordination.k8s.io/end-of-term: true`
- If leader lease expires:
  - Shutdown (yielding leadership) and restart as a candidate component instance

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Started] -->|Create Identity Lease| B
    B[Candidate] --> |Elected| C[Leader]
    C --> |Renew Leader Lease| C
    C -->|End of Term / Leader Lease Expired| D[Shutdown]
    D[Shutdown] -.-> |Restart| A
```

> ### Enabling on a component

Reviewer 5: Describe how can we migrate the existing components to use it safely?

    election controller after it updates it's identity lease with new version
    information
- When the third node is upgraded, all components will be at the new version and one
  will be elected

#### Story 2

A cluster administrator rolls back a cluster's control plane node-by-node,
expecting version skew to be respected.

- When the first node is rolled back, any components that were leaders
  will typically loose the lease during the node downtime
- Once one of the components updates its identity lease with new version
  information, the coordinated election controller will preempt the current
  leader so that this lower version component becomes leader.
- When the remaining two nodes can rollback, the first node will typically
  remain leader, but if a new election occurs, the available older version
  components will be elected.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 5: Another risk that we should mention here is performance/cost related.

Leader-election suddenly becomes visibly more expensive, because so far there was effectively a single update of an object per <lease-duration-period>/2, with this change we have additional <number of instances> of objects, each of them is being updated.

I can definitely imagine things like leader-election PL suddenly having too few shares in certain clusters etc.

@linxiulei - FYI

Reviewer 5: FWIW - for now nothing in the core is watching lease's, which will change with the proposal.

[I've historically seen the visible watch-delay on leases in very large clusters, I think we addressed that, but definitely this is the next risk I see...]

Reviewer 7: If I understand this KEP correctly, non-leaders will also periodically renew their identity leases. In terms of request count, it will be 2x but UPDATEs tend to take more time to process so in practice it might be >3x. One possible optimization can be that the non-leaders only renew their identity leases when they notice the current leader lease should be preempted by them per their preemption strategy (it could be also simply checking if there are any differences in lease annotations.)

Author: > with this change we have additional of objects, each of them is being updated.

I agree this is a risk, I'll add this to the risk section of this KEP so we can discuss in more detail.

Note that node leases don't change, only leader leases for control plane components, so we're talking about only a few additional leases here.

> I can definitely imagine things like leader-election PL suddenly having too few shares in certain clusters etc.

I think we're proposing about the same lease renewal overhead as adding 3 more nodes to a cluster.

Author: > FWIW - for now nothing in the core is watching lease's, which will change with the proposal.

UVIP does this with apiserver identity leases, but it's in alpha, so we haven't observed the impact of it in production environments yet.  But we should bring this risk up on that KEP as well, because it is likely to surface this issue before this KEP does.

Author: > One possible optimization can be that the non-leaders only renew their identity leases when they notice the current leader lease should be preempted by them per their preemption strategy

Yeah, or we could adjust the lease durations and renewal frequency.  I see component identity as something that might have other uses in the future (this has already happened with apiserver identity, even though it's still in alpha)

Reviewer 2: > only leader leases for control plane components, so we're talking about only a few additional leases here.

I feel that the solution should be extensible to all controllers , not limited to control plane controllers.

Author: > I feel that the solution should be extensible to all controllers , not limited to control plane controllers.

Ah, yes.  The coordinated election would be available to all controllers-- anyone writing a custom controller could use it.   What I meant to say here is that we wouldn't use it for node leases since node leases are used for liveness purposes not for election purposes.

> #### Risk: This breaks leader election in some super subtle way

Reviewer 5: Can you describe those "subtle ways"?

Author: Sure, I was thinking about the "We have to "start over" and build confidence in a new leader election algorithm" problem here. I'll write it out.

      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 5: I can definitely imagine alternatives that aren't even that far from what is proposed and it's not clear to me if this isn't better.

The simplest one that comes to my mind is that we leave the high-level idea similar, but instead of introducing a dedicated controller, the current leader will be doing the "controller" work [in other words it could replace itself with someone else as a leader].
I can see pros and cons of that so analysis of alternatives is important here imho.

Author: I agree and I'm open to shifting to a better approach if we find one. I'd only done some basic thinking about approaches that don't require a "election controller", but I'll flesh this out here.

Author: I've started to sketch up some rough alternatives.   I'm sure there are things I'm not thinking of, but hopefully it's a starting point for discussion.

  - Provide a way to preempt the current leader.
  - Reuse the existing lease mechanism as much as possible.

### Component Lease Candidates

Components will create lease candidates similar to those used by apiserver
identity. Some key differences are certain fields like `LeaseTransitions` and `HolderIdentity` are removed.

> See the API section for the full API.

Reviewer 6: we have to specify how we get from a `NoCoordination` lease to the candidate's strategy. Does the controller match candidates even in `NoCoordination` mode of the lease and set the strategy in case a new component is elected? Or is it the duty of the client-go code?

Reviewer 4: I'll clarify a bit more in the KEP but essentially the controller will read NoCoordination and do nothing. If the lease is already held by a nocoordination component, it will be renewed indefinitely so there's no point doing extra work. When the leader component releases the lease, the controller will then reconcile the `Lease`, see that the lease is currently not held, fetch the `LeaseCandidate`s and update the strategy.

 e.g.:

```yaml
apiVersion: coordination.k8s.io/v1
kind: LeaseCandidate
metadata:
  labels:
    binary-version: "1.29"
    compatibility-version: "1.29"

  name: some-custom-controller-0001A
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  canLeadLease: kube-system/some-custom-controller

>   holderIdentity: some-custom-controller-0001A

Reviewer 6: remove

Reviewer 4: fixed

### Strategy

There are cases where a user may want to change the leader election algorithm
and this can be done via the `spec.Strategy` field in a Lease.

The `Strategy` field signals to the coordinated leader election controller the
appropriate algorithm to use when selecting leaders.

We will allow the Coordinated Leader Election controller to create a Lease
without a holder. This will have a short duration of 5s. During this time, the
`Lease` may be updated by a third party to the desired `spec.Strategy`. The
strategy will always default to `MinimumCompatibilityVersion`, but may be
changed during the initial step of a "leader-less" `Lease`. After the initial 5
seconds, the coordinated leader election controller will proceed with the

> election using the data from `spec.Strategy`.

Reviewer 6: This confuses me again. Why is the CLE special? Can't any party just set the stragegy, either through create or through update (like a human wanting to canary a component) ? Why such complicated 5s logic?

Reviewer 6: I.e. these semantics: 
- if there are no candidate objects, `strategy` is empty and stays empty (legacy mode)
- if there are candidates, CLE will default the strategy to `MinimumCompatibilityVersion`.
- if there are candidates objects and they have opinions, change the strategy on create or via update. It will be sticky. CLE won't touch it.

Author: @sttts You're list looks right to me.  This is along the lines of what I was expecting.  The key thing I was hoping to see was support for both create and update in the third bullet point (exactly as you have it), so that it's clear that any authorized writer in the system has the opportunity to set or change the strategy when desired, including before the controller is started.

Reviewer 4: I think that's possible, but I want to just justify the 5s logic a bit. 

>- if there are no candidate objects, strategy is empty and stays empty (legacy mode). Components do >election themselves.
>- if there are candidates, CLE will default the strategy to MinimumCompatibilityVersion.

The first two points are satisfied regardless of approach.

> if there are candidates objects and they have opinions (or a human has), make them (or the human) change the strategy on create or via update. It will be sticky. CLE won't touch it.

- To make it "sticky", we may need to rethink how releasing the lease works. Currently, releasing a lease involves deleting the lease object and letting leader election determine the next lease. The strategy information will disappear since the resource is deleted. To solve this, we can persist leases such that releasing does not involve deletion, but may run into things like unable to determine orphaned leases. Alternatively, would we require users to update the Lease every time the leader changes? In theory, a lot of user initiated strategy changes (like canary) are temporary, and it could be good to reset to default after a certain period. 
- candidates are not responsible for creating the Lease, the CLE is responsible. It doesn't make sense for candidates to create  the lease because they do not have the full view of other candidates, only the CLE controller maintains the full picture. Is this a point we need to revisit? Candidates will only be able to change the strategy via update, and CLE may have already gone through a round of leader selection.

Reviewer 6: I understand the deletion problem. Clearly deleting the lease is an anti-pattern then.

I don't understand the last point. If there is a way to create a leaderless lease, and an actor has an opinion beyond the default behaviour, that's the way to state that.

> However, setting it is essentially a noop since CLE will not operate on Lease objects that have no candidates.

exactly. So won't the candidates beyond creating/updating the leaderless lease. They will just ensure their opinion is stated and CLE will pick it up when it is time.

Reviewer 6: To be on the same page: how does a leaderless lease look like in detail? From the former discussion I assumed we have a canonical, validating shape for that.

Author: +1, let's define it clearly.  I was intuitively expecting it to look very close to an expired lease to minimize the number of distinct states..

Reviewer 4: > Giving up leadership would mean to update to that leaderless state, instead of deletion.

ack, yes this part is what I imagined a leaderless lease would look like and solves the deletion problem. I think the shape of the leaderless lease is not a point of contention and is exactly as described (looks like an expired lease, has all the fields of a Lease except the holder and renewTime). The main thing we're trying to resolve is the creator of the leaderless lease. 

Correct me if I'm wrong but I think what you're saying is that a leaderless lease can be created by anyone (thus solving both create and update case for setting the strategy). I'm still under the impression that it may only be created by the CLE controller and feels like a mixup of responsibilities allowing for instance candidates to create a leaderless Lease that they do not claim. 

My 5s idea was based on the idea that if only the CLE controller was able to create an empty lease, then specifically for "strategy on create" cases, components need time some time to set the default before the CLE controller starts assuming a default strategy and selecting leaders. This does get resolved if an interested candidate chooses to create the leaderless lease themselves to set the strategy. I'm curious if that was the suggestion or if there's more regarding the point *"if there are candidates objects and they have opinions (or a human has), make them (or the human) change the strategy on create or via update. It will be sticky. CLE won't touch it."*

Reviewer 6: 5s or any other timing dependent mechanism feels like both a Kube anti-pattern and it seems to be brittle. 5s in pod startup time terms is super small.

Reviewer 4: Spent some more time thinking about it, and yeah I think the approach that allows anyone to create an empty lease is sound. It should still be recommended to stick with the default "MinimumCompatibilityVersion" strategy, but if we already see that a lease has been created, the strategy used will be respected and used.

const (
  OldestCompatibilityVersionStrategy CoordinatedStrategy = "OldestCompatibilityVersionStrategy"
  NewestCompatibilityVersionStrategy CoordinatedStrategy = "NewestCompatibilityVersionStrategy"

>   NoCoordinationStrategy CoordinatedStrategy = "NoCoordinationStrategy"

Reviewer 6: nit: the field is called `strategy`. No need to repeat that word in the value, i.e. `NoCoordination` is enough.

Reviewer 4: Fixed.

from the coordinated election controller to leases that were claimed by
component instances not using Coordinated Leader Election

### API

The lease lock API will be extended with a new field for election preference, denoted as an enum for strategies for Coordinated Leader Election.

```go

type CoordinatedLeaseStrategy string

// CoordinatedLeaseStrategy defines the strategy for picking the leader for coordinated leader election.
const (
  OldestCompatibilityVersionStrategy CoordinatedStrategy = "OldestCompatibilityVersionStrategy"
  NewestCompatibilityVersionStrategy CoordinatedStrategy = "NewestCompatibilityVersionStrategy"
)

type LeaseSpec struct {
  // Strategy indicates the strategy for picking the leader for coordinated leader election

>   Strategy CoordinatedLeaseStrategy `json:"strategy,omitempty" protobuf:"string,6,opt,name=strategy"`

Author: nit: indentation differs from below

Reviewer 4: Updated

  // EXISTING FIELDS BELOW

	// holderIdentity contains the identity of the holder of a current lease.
	// +optional
	HolderIdentity *string `json:"holderIdentity,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=holderIdentity"`
	// leaseDurationSeconds is a duration that candidates for a lease need
	// to wait to force acquire it. This is measure against time of last
	// observed renewTime.
	// +optional
	LeaseDurationSeconds *int32 `json:"leaseDurationSeconds,omitempty" protobuf:"varint,2,opt,name=leaseDurationSeconds"`
	// acquireTime is a time when the current lease was acquired.
	// +optional
	AcquireTime *metav1.MicroTime `json:"acquireTime,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=acquireTime"`
	// renewTime is a time when the current holder of a lease has last
	// updated the lease.
	// +optional
	RenewTime *metav1.MicroTime `json:"renewTime,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,4,opt,name=renewTime"`
	// leaseTransitions is the number of transitions of a lease between
	// holders.
	// +optional
	LeaseTransitions *int32 `json:"leaseTransitions,omitempty" protobuf:"varint,5,opt,name=leaseTransitions"`
}
```

For the identity leases, a new lease will be created

```go

> type IdentityLeaseSpec struct {

Author: apiserver identity migrates to this? (should that KEP be updated to track that change? When does it happen?)

Reviewer 6: This type confuses me. Why is this even a lease? Nothing is elected here, or is it? Isn't this more a `LeaseCandidacy`?

```
apiVersion: coordination.k8s.io/v1
kind: LeaseCandidacy
metadata:
  labels:
    coordination.k8s.io/binary-version: "1.29"
    coordination.k8s.io/compatibility-version: "1.29"
  name: some-custom-controller-0001A
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  leaseName: some-custom-controller
  leaseDurationSeconds: 10
  renewTime: "2023-12-05T02:33:08.685777Z"
```

I.e.:
- no `can-lead-lease: kube-system/some-custom-controller` label. Everything is informer-based in the controller. No need for label selectors.
- no candidacy holder
- no acquireTime, it's stored in the lease
- no LeaseTransitions, it's stored in the lease
- binary/comp-version as labels, so it is extensible. I could be convinced of a `spec.properties map[string]string`. That's about taste. Either works.

Reviewer 6: As commented above, do we need the strategy here? And if yes, we have to order strategies in case there are candidates where they differ.

Reviewer 6: > We need a way of identifying the `Lease` that a LeaseCandidacy may lead. Would that be defined through the metadata and spec.leaseName? One pro of having both in one field is that it's easier to filter the set of candidates when doing leader election on the apiserver.

Was talking about having a field instead of a label. The apiserver can use either, does not matter. And an external actor likely will not care either about a label. There won't be tons of LeaseCandidacies per namespace. So it's easy to list all e.g. via kubectl. But no super strong opinion here.

Reviewer 6: > no strong preference, I like these ones as fields so we can validate semver easier. Will do some digging to see how that behavior is with labels vs map.

This would be by the strategy. The strategy for kube-oldest-version will consider certain properties/labels as semver. If you choose a `Custom` strategy and implement your own logic, you can assume any type you like, semver or something else.

Reviewer 4: > Was talking about having a field instead of a label. The apiserver can use either, does not matter. And an external actor likely will not care either about a label. There won't be tons of LeaseCandidacies per namespace. So it's easy to list all e.g. via kubectl. But no super strong opinion here.

using field instead of label sounds good. It's also possible to use field selectors for optimization so what I brought up earlier is a non-issue.

Author: Re: field vs. label.   API review is going to dig into this for sure, so it's quite possible whatever we recommend here in the KEP will change..

My $.02: To me the only actual benefit to a field is up-front validation. If we don't validate anything about the versions, we'd need to define how we handle the arbitrary strings very carefully. I'd be inclined to just state what our expectations are up-front by making it a validated field..

For the identity leases, a new lease will be created

```go
type LeaseCandidateSpec struct {
  // The fields BinaryVersion and CompatibilityVersion will be mandatory labels instead of fields in the spec
	// BinaryVersion indicates the binary version of the component

> 	// BinaryVersion string

Reviewer 6: remove

	// Compatibility Version indicates the compatibility version of the component. Must be less than or equal to the binary version

> 	// CompatibilityVersion string

Reviewer 6: remove

Reviewer 4: I've commented these out but kept them for now. Joe has some thoughts around keeping part of it that I'll let him comment.

	// CanLeadLease is in the format <namespace>/<name>, indicating the namespace and name of the lease that the candidate may lead

> 	CanLeadLease string

Reviewer 6: why namespace? Can't we make this local? Cannot imagine a usecase for cross-namespace setups. Also this might be a security problem or at least needs a discussion how to protect a lease from being hijacked.

Reviewer 4: cc @jpbetz. I'm overall +1 on making it local though I'm not sure if we have any cases of cross-namespace setups.

Reviewer 6: Still open.

	// Strategy indicates the preferred strategy for the coordinated leader election controller to use.

> 	Strategy CoordinatedLeaseStrategy `json:"strategy,omitempty" protobuf:"string,6,opt,name=strategy"`

Reviewer 6: Hmm, this confuses me now. From our Slack thread I didn't expect this field in `LeaseCandidate`. But let me keep reading.
